>> Reporter: THE DOCUMENTARY
"CHASING CORAL" TELLS THE STORY
OF A THREE-YEAR EFFORT TO
CAPTURE THE LOSS OF THE WORLD'S
CORAL REEFS THROUGH TIME-LAPSE,
UNDERWATER PHOTOGRAPHY.
THE FILM FOCUSES ON THE PROCESS
CALLED CORAL BLEACHING.
WHEN OCEAN WATER BECOMES TOO
WARM, CORALS BECOME STRESSED AND
EXPEL THE ALGAE LIVING IN THEIR
TISSUE, CAUSING THE CORALS TO
TURN COMPLETELY WHITE.
CORAL BLEACHING IS HAPPENING
MORE OFTEN AS CLIMATE CHANGE
RAISES THE TEMPERATURE OF
OCEANS, WHICH HAVE ABSORBED MORE
THAN 90% OF THE HEAT CREATED BY
MAN-MADE GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS.
ONE AREA THE FILM FOCUSES ON IS
AUSTRALIA'S GREAT BARRIER REEF,
WHERE THE AVERAGE OCEAN WATER
TEMPERATURE HAS WARMED BY ABOUT
1.2-DEGREES FAHRENHEIT OVER THE
LAST CENTURY.
JEFF ORLOWSKI DIRECTED "CHASING
CORAL."
>> CORAL REEFS ARE THE BACKBONE
FOR THE ENTIRE OCEAN.
THEY ARE THE NURSERY FOR THE
OCEAN.
ABOUT A QUARTER OF ALL MARINE
LIFE IN THE OCEAN SPENDS PART OF
ITS LIFECYCLE ON A CORAL REEF.
AND THERE ARE ABOUT A BILLION OR
SO PEOPLE THAT DEPEND ON CORAL
REEFS FOR FISH FOR THEIR FOOD,
FOR PROTEIN.
>> Reporter: A TEAM OF DIVERS,
PHOTOGRAPHERS, AND SCIENTISTS
LOGGED 650 HOURS UNDERWATER IN
30 COUNTRIES TO MAKE "CHASING
CORAL."
ORLOWSKI SAYS THE CHALLENGE WAS
GATHERING MULTIPLE IMAGES A DAY
-- IN THE SAME PLACES FOR MONTHS
-- TO SHOW CHANGES TO THE REEF
IN REAL TIME.
>> FROM THE BEGINNING, WE KNEW
THAT IF WE COULD FIGURE OUT A
WAY TO DO TIME LAPSE OF THIS
CHANGE HAPPENING IN THE OCEAN,
THAT IT WOULD BE THE MOST
POWERFUL VISUAL THAT WE COULD
CREATE.
THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT CREATING
EVIDENCE.
WHEN YOU LOOK AT A PIECE OF ICE
CALVING OR YOU LOOK AT A
WILDFIRE BURNING, BECAUSE THAT'S
PART OF THIS NORMAL CYCLE, IT
DOESN'T REGISTER IN THE SAME WAY
AS WHEN YOU CAN DOCUMENT THE
CHANGE OVER TIME
>> Reporter: WHY DID YOU
SPECIFICALLY FOCUS ON THE EVENT
OF CORAL BLEACHING?
>> THE REALLY VALUABLE THING
ABOUT DOCUMENTING CORAL
BLEACHING IS THAT IT IS THIS
STRAIGHT, VERY DIRECT VISUAL
INDICATOR OF HOW HOT THE OCEANS
ARE GETTING.
IF THE TEMPERATURE OF THE WATER
PASSES A CERTAIN THRESHOLD, THE
CORALS TURN WHITE.
IT'S THAT SIMPLE.
THERE'S NOTHING NATURAL ABOUT
THE CYCLE THAT'S GOING ON RIGHT
NOW.
IN 2016, WE LOST 29% OF THE
GREAT BARRIER REEF.
SO 29% OF THE GREAT BARRIER REEF
DIED IN A SINGLE YEAR, BECAUSE
THE WATER WAS HOT.
>> Reporter: THE FILM SHOWS HOW
RICHARD VEVERS, A FORMER
ADVERTISING EXECUTIVE TURNED
OCEAN ACTIVIST, WAS INSPIRED TO
DOCUMENT CORAL BLEACHING, WHICH
CAN BE REVERSED, BUT CAN ALSO
OFTEN LEAD CORALS TO DIE
>> I WAS TRULY SHOCKED BY WHAT I
SAW.
THE REEF WAS WHITE AS FAR AS THE
EYE COULD SEE.
TO BE HONEST, I DIDN'T HAVE THE
KNOWLEDGE TO KNOW HOW TO PROCESS
IT.
WAS THIS DEAD?
WAS IT ALIVE?
THIS IS AIRPORT REEF.
SO THIS IS IN DECEMBER.
AND THIS IS IT NOW.
>> Reporter: IS THERE SOMETHING
ABOUT CORAL BLEACHING THOUGH,
THAT IS A LITTLE BIT
COUNTERINTUITIVE, BECAUSE IT
DOESN'T LOOK LIKE DYING?
>> THERE'S A HUGE CHALLENGE
AROUND CORAL BLEACHING
SPECIFICALLY, BECAUSE WHEN MOST
PEOPLE THINK ABOUT CORAL, THEY
THINK ABOUT THE BEAUTIFUL, WHITE
SCULPTURE SITTING ON THEIR
MANTLE.
AND IT LOOKS SO PRISTINE AND
CLEAN AND BEAUTIFUL.
IT'S NOT SUPPOSED TO LOOK LIKE
THAT WHEN IT'S IN THE OCEAN.
IT HAS COLOR, IT HAS ANIMAL
FLESH LIVING ON IT, IT HAS
PLANTS LIVING INSIDE OF THAT.
THEY LOOK VERY, VERY DIFFERENT
WHEN THEY'RE HEALTHY IN THE
OCEAN THAN THEY DO WHEN THEY'RE
SITTING IN SOMEBODY'S HOME.
>> Reporter: HOW DID YOU
APPROACH TAKING THESE UNDERWATER
IMAGES?
>> WE HAD TO ALIGN THE CAMERAS
MANUALLY EVERY DAY.
YOU GET THE CAMERA POSITIONED IN
THE RIGHT SPOT, PANNING IN THE
RIGHT WAY.
I ACTUALLY HAD UNDERWATER LASERS
ZIP-TIED TO THE CAMERA SYSTEM.
LITERALLY THE GROUND THAT YOU'RE
PUTTING THE CAMERA ON IS
CHANGING EVERY DAY.
SO TO GET THE CAMERA IN THE SAME
EXACT SPOT IN THIS THREE-
DIMENSIONAL SPACE WAS REALLY,
REALLY CHALLENGING.
WE WOULD LET IT ROLL FOR A
COUPLE MINUTES, THEN PICK ALL
THE EQUIPMENT UP, GO TO ANOTHER
SITE AND DO IT AGAIN.
>> Reporter: THIS ISN'T
ORLOWSKI'S FIRST FILM
DOCUMENTING CLIMATE CHANGE.
HIS 2012 FILM "CHASING ICE"
CHRONICLED THE MELTING OF THE
WORLD'S GLACIERS, AND WON AN
EMMY AWARD FOR OUTSTANDING
NATURE PROGRAMMING.
WAS IT MORE DIFFICULT TO CHASE
ICE AND DOCUMENT WHAT'S
HAPPENING IN THE GLACIERS OR TO
CHASE THE CORALS AND DOCUMENT
WHAT'S HAPPENING IN THE OCEANS?
>> WORKING IN THE ARCTIC IS
DEFINITELY COLDER, BUT NOT
NECESSARILY HARDER.
THERE WERE DIFFERENT CHALLENGES.
AND IN MANY WAYS, CHASING CORAL
WAS EVEN MORE OF A STRUGGLE FOR
ME PERSONALLY.
AND MORE OF A STRUGGLE TO
CAPTURE.
GLACIERS RIGHT NOW ARE CHANGING
VERY CONSISTENTLY.
THE INTERESTING THING THAT WE
REALIZED WITH CHASING CORAL WAS
THAT THE CORAL REEFS- THEY CAN
GO FROM LIVING TO DEAD IN TWO
MONTHS.
AND IF YOU'RE NOT THERE AT THE
RIGHT TIME TO CAPTURE THAT
BEFORE AND AFTER, YOU JUST SHOW
UP AND IT'S A DEAD REEF.
SO IT WAS A CHALLENGE TO BE AT
THE RIGHT PLACE AT THE RIGHT
TIME.
>> Reporter: THIS ISN'T A
POLITICAL FILM, BUT IT'S COMING
OUT IN A TIME WHEN CLIMATE
CHANGE IS HIGHLY POLITICIZED.
WHAT'S THAT CHALLENGE IN TERMS
OF MAKING PEOPLE AWARE OF THIS
BUT NOT GETTING SUCKED INTO THAT
DEBATE?
>> I THINK IT IS MASSIVELY
UNFORTUNATE FOR HUMAN
CIVILIZATION THAT THIS ISSUE HAS
BECOME POLITICIZED.
AND WHAT I'M TRYING TO WORK ON
AND WHAT OUR TEAM IS TRYING TO
WORK ON IS HOW DO WE DE-
POLITICIZE IT.
WE NEED TO GET TO A PLACE WHERE
EVERYBODY JUST ACKNOWLEDGES,
OKAY, THERE ARE CHALLENGES, AND
WE KNOW THERE ARE SOLUTIONS, AND
LET'S TALK ABOUT WHAT THOSE
SOLUTIONS ARE.
DENYING THE PROBLEM JUST
PROLONGS THE PROBLEM.